## General

### What is the general architecture of a computer

### How CPU works
The main job of CPU is to perform arithmetic and logical operations and orchestrate the instructions together.
Instructions are provided to computer using aseembly language or are generated by compiler or are interpreted in some high level languages.
In one clock cycle computers can perform one instruction but modern computers can perform more than one.
A group of instructions a computer can perform is called an instruction set.

Instructions are stored on the RAM in a sequential order.
There are tow registers inside a control unit instruction register which loads the operational code of the instruction and instruction address register which loads the address of the current executing instruction.

All the data between CPU, register, memory and IO devices are transferred via bus.
To load the data to memory that it has just added, the CPU puts the memory address to address bus and the result of the sum to data bus and enables the right signal in control bus.

## Programming

### What is the difference between an array and a linked list

### What are the concepts of OOP

## Networking

### What is a subnet mask
Evert device has an IP address with two pieces:
the client or host address and the server or network address.
IP addresses are either configured by a DHCP server or manually configured.
The subnet mask splits the IP address into the host and network addresses, thereby defining which part of the IP address belongs to the device and which part belongs to the network.

A subnet mask is a 32-bit number created by setting host bits to all 0s and setting network bits to all 1s.
In this way, the subnet mask separates the IP address into the network and host addresses.

Subnetting is the technique for logically partitioning a single physical network into multiple smaller sub-networks or subnets.
Subnetting enables an organisation to conceal network complexity and reduce network traffic by adding subnets without a new network number.

The benefits of subnetting include:
- reducing broadcast volume and thus network traffic
- enabling work from home
- allowing organizations to surpass LAN constraints such as maximum number of hosts

## Operating System
